---
title: 'Blog Post number 1'
date: 2012-08-14
permalink: /posts/2012/08/blog-post-1/
tags:
  - cool posts
  - category1
  - category2
---
When advecting a quantity \\(q\\) (like a velocity component, smoke density or temperature) over the velocity field \\(\\vec{u}\\) in a Semi-Lagrangian way, we need to trace back in time to get the new values for our grid.

Imagine a particle carrying a specific quantity value passively advected by the fluid flow. In a given instant of time \\(n\\), the particle ending at a grid point
\\(\\vec{X}\_E\\) started its trajectory at point \\(\vec{X}_S\\) on the previous simulation step \\(n-1\\). Finding its initial position is simply going backwards following the velocity field:
$$ \vec{X}_S = \vec{X}_E - \triangle t\vec{u}(\vec{X}_E) $$

Linear Interpolation
======

Of course, the most natural way of thinking is assuming everything is linear. Its not surprising the easiest form of interpolating quantities is by linear interpolation. On 2D grids we use bilinear interpolation and trilinear for 3D cases.

#### Runge-Kutta

Linear interpolations only gives us a first order approximation of the solution. A second order approximation can be performed by taking a mid-step on our position calculation:

$$ \vec{X}_{mid} = \vec{X}_E - \frac{1}{2}\triangle t\vec{u}(\vec{X}_E)$$

$$ \vec{X}_S = \vec{X}_E - \triangle t\vec{u}(\vec{X}_{mid})$$

It is called second-order Runge-Kutta method and there are higher-order Runge-Kutta methods as well.

## [Monotonic Cubic Interpolation](http://physbam.stanford.edu/~fedkiw/papers/stanford2001-01.pdf)

The Hermit interpolant for a point \\(t \in [t_k, t_{k+1}] \\) and values \\(f_k\\) defined at positions \\(k = 0, 1, ...,N \\) is:

$$ f(t) = a_3(t - t_k)^3 + a_2(t - t_k)^2 + a_1(t - t_k) + a_0,$$

where

$$ a_3 = d_k + d_{k+1} - \triangle_k$$

$$ a_2 = 3\triangle_k - 2d_k - d_{k+1}$$

$$ a_1 = d_k$$

$$ a_0 = f_k$$

$$ d_k = \frac{(f_{k+1} - f_{k-1})}{2} $$

$$ \triangle_k = f_{k+1} - f_k$$

This method overshoots data, which is bad, since one of the great advantages of Semi-Lagrangian schemes is its numerical stability. The [Monotonic Cubic Interpolation](http://physbam.stanford.edu/~fedkiw/papers/stanford2001-01.pdf) forces the interpolant to be monotonic over the interval \\([t_k, t_{k+1}] \\) by setting the following condition:
$$
\begin{cases}
 & sign(d_k) = sign(d_{k+1}) = sign(\triangle_k) & \triangle_k \neq 0\\\
 & d_k = d_{k+1} = 0 & \triangle_k = 0
\end{cases}
$$

This is a sample blog post. Lorem ipsum I can't remember the rest of lorem ipsum and don't have an internet connection right now. Testing testing testing this blog post. Blog posts are cool.

Headings are cool
======

You can have many headings
======

Aren't headings cool?
------